In the last lecture, I introduce mixins and it's important to understand what mixins really are and
what the difference to classes or to extending a class is.
So here I'm back in DartPad
but of course, the same code could be run in the Flutter app.
Let's start simple, let's create a new class, a Person class and that's what we did before in DartPad
and we created classes all the time here in this course
thus far. I'll keep this simple,
it will have a name property and an age property and then we might have a constructor which allows us to
assign values to the name and the age properties.
Now it's of course no surprise that we can create a new person here with the help of that person constructor
by passing values for these arguments
and then here if we print pers.name and we run this code and I also fixed this error of having a colon
here where we should have a semicolon, we get Max here.
So that's nothing too new, that's a class.
Now you also learned that classes can extend other things.
So for example, we could have a class, mammal which in the end has a method let's say, which doesn't return
anything, which is named breathe and there we just print
breathe in, breathe out, something like that. Now unsurprisingly, this person can extend mammal, that's also what
you learned, extending classes,
a concept called inheritance,
that's a core thing of object oriented programming languages and therefore Dart has this too. The consequence
of Person extending mammal is that on the person here,
we can now also call breathe
and in addition to that, pers,
so this variable now has two types.
It is of type person but it's also of type mammal.
So if we had some other place in this application that wants an argument which is of type mammal, we
could pass in pers as well because since it's of type Person which extends mammal, it's automatically
also of type mammal.
So let's run this code here and of course, we see breathe in, breathe out. So that's working because of
inheritance.
Now the core idea behind inheritance is that this class, the person class gets all the properties and methods
of the Mammal class,
you can also override methods there with @Override and then by simply defining the same method
here,
breathe, like this,
that would be possible
and you've got the same type.
Now another important thing you have to understand when using extends and inheritance is that you really
are also saying that there should be a strong connection between this class and this class
from a logical point of view.
So technically, you're just getting all the properties and all the methods but logically, there also should
be a strong connection,
so you inherit if you would say that in real life, there would be a connection as well.
Now let's have a look at a mixin. You create a mixin with the mixin keyword and thus far, we haven't
created one manually, we're just using one provided by Flutter
but here we can create one and we could name this agility or anything like that.
Well let's say there we have a method, sit down where we just print sitting down. Now in the mixin, we
could also have properties,
it's like a class when it comes to that,
so we could always have a speed property of 10 and we can now use such a mixin on this class here with
the with keyword and there, we can use agility and with that, we can for example print person speed because
the mixin has a speed property and by adding a mixin to a class, you get all the properties and methods
of that mixin in your class.
So person now has the speed property and it also is able to call sit down.
So if I run this, we see 10, that's the speed and sitting down.
So what's the difference between using extends and with then, other than that we use mixin here?
The idea behind a mixin is that you can share methods and properties with multiple classes but logically,
you have less of a strong connection.
A person extends mammal because a person is a mammal, logically in real life we have a strong connection
here.
Agility is something which could provide utility methods for moving something, for sitting, for doing
all kinds of things which are considered agile,
we could add that to anything, we could add it to a person, we could add it to a dog, we could add that
to an object, we could add that to the boxes or to containers
if we're building an application that has such things. So anything that can move could have agility but
Mammal would really only belong to a person.
So the logical relation between that is much stronger than between person and agility. Agility is more
like a utility function provider which we can use to mix certain features into this class
and that's essentially also what we did in the previous lecture.
There, we added with ChangeNotifier to add the utility methods
this gives us, the notifyListeners method mainly, to an existing class.
Other than that, there is no strong relation,
we just want that utility method in the end. Another important difference is that with inheritance, you can
always only inherit from one object, from one class.
So person can extend mammal but we would not be able to extend both mammal and another class, that
does not work.
Some programming languages support multiple parents,
Dart is not one of them, you can only have one parent class. With mixins however, you can add as many
mixins as you want. So you can add multiple mixins to the same class and all their properties and
methods will be merged together in the class.
So really think of mixins as utility functionality providers whereas when you use inheritance, you really
have a strong logical dependency between the two classes.